# DNSMin Welcome Announcement

Hi there PDA community members!

I know it has been quite some time since you have last heard from myself and other project maintainers, and for that
I apologize. I hope that with this announcement you will find not only forgiveness for the project's lack of
improvement, but also newfound joy with the developments that have been taking place quietly under the radar.
I wanted to wait to make this announcement until a certain point of progress was achieved as to give you all something
to get truly excited about. So with that, let's get right into it!

## Project Rebranding

As I'm sure you likely noticed upon arriving to this announcement, the project is taking on new branding with a new
name. PowerDNS Admin (PDA) will effectively become known as DNSMin with a slogan of "Built for Big DNS." The slogan
should tell you a lot about the architecture and feature design that has been developing with PDA's replacement. As it
says "Built for Big DNS", all implementation work has taken into account the potential need for scaling to support
large-scale, high-traffic systems for commercial customers, especially those offering hosted DNS services.

With this new branding, comes a new Discord server as well which you can join here: https://discord.dnsmin.org

# Built for Big DNS

What this means in practice is that DNSMin has taken on a modular design where there are more components that can be
individually scaled using traditional horizontal scaling approaches. The core of the product is an API server written
in Python using the FastAPI framework. This is a stateless process so horizontal scaling with load balancers is easy.
Another important component of the system is a Redis-compatible broker used to support automated task queueing as well
as signaling streams used to trigger automated processes and user interface application updates. For those in the know
about Redis, it also is easily scaled.

The user interface is built on the React framework and is also a stand-alone component that can be deployed optionally
by any standard static content hosting option. There are additional worker processes that will be discussed later in
this announcement, each of which are also natively capable of horizontal scaling for capacity. Make no mistake though,
each of these processes will be capable of sizable load patterns before the need would arise to scale horizontally.

# Project Repositories

Given the nature of the modular design of DNSMin, there will be multiple repositories to obtain software from. To keep
it fairly simple, there are now three repositories. Please see below for a brief summary of each.

Keep in mind that these are **works in progress so nothing is production ready!** Please do not open repository issues
or discussions until after the first formal release. Starring the repositories and following them is more than welcomed!

## Feature Core

URL: https://github.com/dnsmin/dnsmin-api

This repository provides the back-end functionality which includes the API server,
the task worker, the asynchronous signal handler, and the DNS receiver.

## User Interface

URL: https://github.com/dnsmin/dnsmin-ui

This repository provides the React-based user interface application that interacts directly with the API server from the
feature core repository.

## Python SDK

URL: https://github.com/dnsmin/dnsmin-sdk-python

This repository provides a simple and clean Python SDK to make integration with the API server very easy while
maintaining a secure, OAuth client credential authentication flow.

# New Features

With all of this big change, will come many new and exciting features. I won't get into an exhaustive list of those
features now as I will let the new project website do that for me. However, I do want to briefly touch on some of the
really exciting features to come.

## Real-Time Signaling

For those users with large installations containing thousands of zones and records, you will no longer have to rely on
excessive server API polling for zone updates! DNSMin will provide a scalable worker process that listens on UDP for
DNS NOTIFY signals from your infrastructure. In turn, that process will queue the execution of a synchronization task
to pull the latest zone data into the DNSMin database. Optionally in this scenario, the zone data can also be pulled
via a DNS AXFR from your authoritative server. As a result of this feature, proper dynamic DNS features can now be
achieved without relying on HTTP-based protocols such as DynDNS2.

## Granular IAM-Style Permissions

It is well understood how limiting the current approach to access control in PDA has been for users. For this reason,
I have taken on a more industry standard approach to access control using IAM-style permissions. What this means in
practice is that administrators can create roles to which permissions can be assigned. Roles can be associated in a
hierarchy to allow for permission inheritance. The best part of all are the ACL policies which don't just target
resource types like zones, zone records, users, etc. but also specific resources! This means that users and API clients
can be given permissions to specific resources right down to zone records!

## API Clients

API access to a DNSMin installation is now achievable using an OAuth 2.0 compliance client credential approach.
Additionally, API client registrations can be created at both system and user levels, meaning your third-party
integration no longer has to be represented by a user account. Like similar systems, permissions can be applied
to API clients and consumed via OAuth scopes. As mentioned above, there will be a Python SDK available to make easy
use of the API features.

## Multi-Server Support

No longer will you have to deploy multiple application instances for each PowerDNS server that needs managed. DNSMin
will allow for an arbitrary number of servers to be added. Moreover, this isn't just limited to the authoritative server
product but will include the recursor and ultimately the load-balancer dnsdist as well. This will allow for easy
consumption of monitoring data as well as process control features. Even better though, this will allow for advanced
management and fluidity to support a number of operational scenarios including primary/secondary, producer/consumer,
and native server deployment, all of which can have their configuration and zone data synchronized.

## Multi-Tenant Support

The application has taken into account the need for some to have not just multiple users with diverse permissions, but
entire tenants each with their own namespace including ACL roles, users, API clients, settings, etc. This feature is
optional for those users that just need the more traditional flat system without the hierarchy of tenant accounts.

# Closing

There will be plenty more to share in the future as it relates to features and what such. Until then, consider this
announcement the project's gift to you for the coming holidays! I appreciate the loyalty you have all shown in sticking
with the project through it's multiple rough patches of stability and stagnation.

Here's to a big launch in 2026 with
a fresh start and a stable foundation.

Cheers!

Matt Scott \
Azorian Solutions